---
layout: post
title: "LOEWE Nature4.0 | Sensing Biodiversity"
summary: The six *SensingTreeStations* are about to successfully complete their first season. 65 additional dendrometers will be set up in the next months in the MarburgOpenForest .
featured-img: nothofagus-galls
---
# News
The six *SensingTreeStations* are about to successfully complete their first season. The *TreeSensorBoxes* had their ups and downs but have been put to rest for the winter. For Dr. Martin Leberecht the winter in turn will be busy, as he will set up 47 additional dendrometers to complete the targeted 50 beech trees in the MarburgOpenForest using the INRA dendrometers.  

# Background
Conservation strategies require the observation and assessment of landscape. Expert surveys have to make a compromise between the level of detail, spatial coverage and temporal repetition, which can only partially be resolved by including aircraft or satellite-based remote sensing approaches. This restricts differentiated nature conservation planning and reaction options.

The objective of [Nature 4.0](https://www.uni-marburg.de/en/fb19/natur40) is the development of a prototype of Natur 4.0, a modular environmental monitoring system for the high-resolution observation of conservation-relevant species, habitats and processes. Nature 4.0 is based on the combination of nature conservation expert surveys and networked remote sensing and environmental sensors, which are attached to remote-controlled aircrafts, rover robots and animals and also used within educational science projects. Together with powerful data integration and data analysis methods, Natur 4.0 enables the differentiated and effective observation of landscape. The recorded time series also serve to develop early warning indicators. Nature 4.0 is thus breaking new ground in the field of comprehensive environmental monitoring. It condenses the in-situ investigations of experts and uses non-regular data collection with mobile platforms to model nature conservation information in the form of regular, small-scale differentiated raster maps.

We are responsible for ÖP1 - phenotyping of trees. We employ classical forestry methods as well as classical sensor-based methods such as dendrometers and sapflow meters. In collaboration with Chris Reudenbach, Marvin Ludwig and Thomas Nauss we use UAVs and satellite images to derive the pheonlogy of trees. TreeSensorBoxes in turn measure the vertical microclimate as well as take under-canopy pictures in our target trees.

# Participating group members
* Dr. Martin Leberecht (sensor based phenotyping)

# Co-workers
* Prof. Dr. Jörg Bendix (UMR)
* Dr. Nico Friess (UMR)
* Dr. Marvin Ludwig (UMR)
* Prof. Dr. Thomas Nauss (UMR)
* Dr. Christoph Reudenbach (UMR)

# Collaboration partners and Institutions
INRA Orleans
* Dr. Phillippe Rozenberg
