---
layout: post
title: H2020 GENTREE | Truly collaborative work
summary: Our three data papers are witnesses of a true European collaboration - with more than 100 co-authors each.
featured-img: Collaboration
---
# News
Three data papers have come out of the GenTree project: "[The GenTree Platform](https://academic.oup.com/gigascience/article/10/3/giab010/6177710?login=true): growth traits and tree-level environmental data in 12 European forest tree species", [The GenTree Leaf Collection](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/geb.13239): Inter‐and intraspecific leaf variation in seven forest tree species in Europe, and [The GenTree Dendroecological Collection](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41597-019-0340-y), tree-ring and wood density data from seven tree species across Europe. They present the results of our collective data collection campaigns. All data is open access and will hopefully facilitate many analyses to come. Right now we are working on the first association genomic analyses.

# Background
[GenTree](http://www.gentree-h2020.eu/) is a H2020 funded collaborative research project that started in 2016. The goal of GenTree is to provide the European forestry sector with better knowledge, methods and tools for optimising the management and sustainable use of forest genetic resources (FGR) in Europe in the context of climate change and continuously evolving demands for forest products and services. 
My group is mostly involved in workpackages 1, 3 and 4 - so dealing with the genomic and phenotypic analyses of in total 12 important forest tree species. Most of all we are interested in Beech, Oak, Poplar, Spruce and Silver Fir.

# Participating group members
* Dr. Isabelle Lesur (bioinformatics)
* Dr. Martin Leberecht (sensor based phenotyping)
* MSc Sebastian Richter (uav based phenotyping and environmental characterization)

# Co-workers
* Prof. Dr. Katrin Heer (UMR)
* Prof. Dr. Thomas Nauss (UMR)
* Dr. Sascha Liepelt (UMR)
* Dr. Christoph Reudenbach (UMR)
* Dr. Felix Gugerli (WSL)
* Dr. Christian Rellstab (WSL)
* Dr. Benjamin Dauphin (WSL)
* Dr. Patrick Fonti (WSL)
* Dr. Elisabeth Martinez (WSL)

# Collaboration partners and Institutions
INRA Avignon
* Dr. Bruno Fady
* Dr. Ivan Scotti

INRA Bordeaux
* Prof. Dr. Christophe Plomion

INRA Orleans
* Dr. Phillippe Rozenberg

University of Oulu
* Dr. Tanja Pyhäjärvi

Uppsala University
* Prof. Dr. Martin Lascoux

CNR Florence
* Dr. Giovanni Guiseppe Vendramin
